Teachers challenge and extend students’ conceptual understanding and skills.
Through new experiences, the students develop deeper and broader
understanding, more information, and adequate skills. Students apply their
understanding of the concept by conducting additional activities. 
Applies new labels, definitions,
explanations, and skills in new but similar
situations
Uses previous information to ask questions,
propose solutions, make decisions, and
design experiments
Draws reasonable conclusions from
evidence
Records observations and explanations
Checks for understanding among peers 

The elaborate phase of the learning cycle
provides an opportunity for students to
apply their knowledge to new domains,
which may include raising new questions
and hypotheses to explore. This phase
may also include related numerical problems for students to solve. When students
explore the heating curve of water and
the related heats of fusion and vaporization, they can then perform a similar experiment with another liquid or, using
data from a reference table, compare and
contrast materials with respect to freezing and boiling points. A further elaboration may ask students to consider the
specific heats of metals in comparison to
water and to explain why pizza from the
oven remains hot but aluminum foil beneath the pizza cools so rapidly.
The elaboration phase ties directly to
the psychological construct called
“transfer of learning” (Thorndike 1923).
Schools are created and supported with
the expectation that more general uses
of knowledge will be found outside of
school and beyond the school years
(Hilgard and Bower 1975). Transfer of
learning can range from transfer of one
concept to another (e.g., Newton’s law
of gravitation and Coulomb’s law of
electrostatics); one school subject to another (e.g., math skills applied in scientific investigations); one year to another
(e.g., significant figures, graphing,
chemistry concepts in physics); and
school to nonschool activities (e.g., using
a graph to calculate whether it is cost

The activities in this phase of the learning cycle should encourage
students to apply their new understanding of concepts, while reinforcing new skills.
Students are encouraged to check for understanding with their peers, or to design
new experiments or models based on the new skills or concepts they have acquired.
The goal of this phase is to help develop deeper and broader understandings of the
concepts. Students may conduct additional investigations, develop products, share
information and ideas, or apply their knowledge and skills to other disciplines. This
is a great opportunity to integrate science with other content areas. Elaboration
activities may also integrate technology, such as web-based research 
