The teacher or a curriculum task accesses the learners’ prior knowledge and
helps them become engaged in a new concept through the use of short activities
that promote curiosity and elicit prior knowledge. The activity should make
connections between past and present learning experiences, expose prior
conceptions, and organize students’ thinking toward the learning outcomes of
current activities. 
Asks questions such as, “Why did this
happen?” “What do I already know about
this?” “What can I find out about this?”
Shows interest in the topic 

The engage component in the 5E model is intended to
capture students attention, get students thinking about the
subject matter, raise questions in students minds, stimulate thinking, and access prior knowledge. For example,
teachers may engage students by creating surprise or doubt
through a demonstration that shows a piece of steel sinking and a steel toy boat floating. Similarly, a teacher may
place an ice cube into a glass of water and have the class
observe it float while the same ice cube placed in a second
glass of liquid sinks. The corresponding conversation with
the students may access their prior learning. The students
should have the opportunity to ask and attempt to answer,
“Why is it that the toy boat does not sink?”
The engage component includes both accessing prior
knowledge and generating enthusiasm for the subject
matter. Teachers may excite students, get them interested and ready to learn, and believe they are fulfilling
the engage phase of the learning cycle, while ignoring
the need to find out what prior knowledge students
bring to the topic.

In this first phase of the cycle, the teacher aims to assess student prior
knowledge and/or identify possible misconceptions. This student-centered phase
should be a motivational period that can create a desire to learn more about the
upcoming topic. Students may brainstorm an opening question or ask themselves:
“What do I already know about this topic?” Discrepant events, demonstrations,
questioning, or graphic organizers such as KWL charts may be included to create
interest or generate curiosity. A KWL chart asks students to brainstorm and record
what they Know, Want to know, and (eventually) have Learned about the topic. The
KWL chart is used to pre-assess student prior knowledge and is oftentimes referred
to throughout the duration of the lesson. The instructional task is identified. 
