The explanation phase focuses students attention on a particular aspect of their
engagement and exploration experiences and provides opportunities to
demonstrate their conceptual understanding, process skills, or behaviors. This
phase also provides opportunities for teachers to directly introduce a concept,
process, or skill. Learners explain their understanding of the concept. An
explanation from the teacher or the curriculum may guide them toward a deeper
understanding, which is a critical part of this phase. 
Explains possible solutions or answers to
others
Listens critically to others’ explanations
Questions others’ explanations
Listens to and tries to comprehend
explanations that the teacher offers
Refers to previous activities
Uses recorded observations in explanations
Assesses own understanding 

Students are introduced to models,
laws, and theories during the explain
phase of the learning cycle. Students
summarize results in terms of these new
theories and models. The teacher guides
students toward coherent and consistent
generalizations, helps students with distinct scientific vocabulary, and provides
questions that help students use this vocabulary to explain the results of their
explorations. The distinction between
the explore and explain components ensures that concepts precede terminology.

this is more
teacher-directed and guided by the students’ prior experience during the exploration
phase. The explanation phase enables students to describe their understanding and
pose questions about the concepts they have been exploring. It is likely that new
questions will be generated. The explanation phase is an essential, minds-on part of
the 5E lesson. Before the teacher attempts to provide an explanation, the students must first have the opportunity to express their own explanations and ideas. Thus, the
initial part of the explanation phase is a time for the teacher to serve as a facilitator
and ask the students to describe and discuss their exploration learning experiences.
After the students have had the opportunity to share their own explanations, the
teacher introduces scientific and technical information in a direct manner. This phase
includes clarification of student misconceptions that may have emerged during the
engagement or exploration phases. Formal definitions, notes, and labels are
provided. The teacher may also decide to integrate video, computer software
programs, or other visual aides to help with student understanding. The students
should then be able to clearly explain the important concepts to the teacher and to
their peers. 
