Adaptive
e-learning environments, which are referred to as Adaptive
Educational Hypermedia, can provide individuals with individualized environments such as different learning
strategies and sources, support for solution, and interfaces taking
into consideration individual differences. Adaptive e-learning environments based on specific learning styles are more productive, create higher satisfaction level,
diminish learning time, and increase the academic achievement
of students

The adaptive e-learning environment is an emerging research field that deals with the development approach to fulfill students' learning styles by adapting the learning environment within the learning management system to change the concept of delivering e-content. Adaptive e-learning is a learning process in which the content is taught or adapted based on the responses of the students' learning styles or preferences. By offering customized content, adaptive e-learning environments improve the quality of online learning. The customized environment should be adaptable based on the needs and learning styles of each student in the same course. Adaptive e-learning changes the level of instruction dynamically based on student learning styles and personalizes instruction to enhance or accelerate a student's success. Directing instruction to each student's strengths and content needs can minimize course dropout rates, increase student outcomes and the speed at which they are accomplished. The personalized learning approach focuses on providing an effective, customized, and efficient path of learning so that every student can participate in the learning process. 
In e-learning environments, adaptation is constructed on a series of well-designed processes to fit the instructional materials. The adaptive e-learning framework attempt to match  content to the learners' needs and styles. They rely on constructing a model of each learner's needs, preferences, and styles. The following features of adaptive e-learning environments can be identified through diversity, interactivity, adaptability, feedback, performance, and predictability.

The term Adaptive E-learning System refers to the set of techniques and approaches that are combined together to offer online courses to the learners with the aim of providing customized resources and interfaces. Most of these systems focus on adaptive contents which are generated to the learners without considering the learning styles of the learners. Learning style of the learner defines the way of learning the contents. The system should not only meet the individual need of the contents but also the customized user interface on the portal. Some of the solutions such as adaptive contents, exercises, solution analyzers and adaptive collaborative systems perform their respective functions more efficiently to satisfy the requirements and preferences of the learners. Implement the adaptation at course level by generating adaptive contents, activities and examinations. An adaptive system must be capable of managing learning paths adaptable to each learner, monitoring the learner’s activities, interpreting those using specific models, inferring learner’s needs and preferences and exploiting domain knowledge to dynamically facilitate the learning process


