Exploration experiences provide students with a common base of activities
within which current concepts (i.e., misconceptions), processes, and skills are
identified and conceptual change is facilitated. Learners may complete lab
activities that help them use prior knowledge to generate new ideas, explore
questions and possibilities, and design and conduct a preliminary investigation. 
Thinks freely, within the limits of the
activity
Tests predictions and hypotheses
Forms new predictions and hypotheses
Tries alternatives and discusses them with
others
Records observations and ideas
Asks related questions
Suspends judgment

The explore phase of the learning cycle provides an opportunity for students to observe, record data, isolate
variables, design and plan experiments, create graphs,
interpret results, develop hypotheses, and organize their
findings. Teachers may frame questions, suggest approaches, provide feedback, and assess understandings.
An excellent example of teaching a lesson on the metabolic rate of water fleas illustrates the effectiveness of the learning cycle with
varying amounts of teacher and learner
ownership and control.

the exploration phase now provides the students with a common, concrete
learning experience. This phase is also student-centered and incorporates active
exploration. Students are encouraged to apply process skills, such as observing,
questioning, investigating, testing predictions, hypothesizing, and communicating,
with other peers. This phase of the learning cycle tends to incorporate the main
inquiry-based activity or experience, which encourages students to develop skills and
concepts. The teacher’s role is one of facilitator or consultant. In addition, students
are encouraged to work in a cooperative learning environment without direct
instruction from the teacher. This phase is also unique because the students are given
a “hands-on” experience before any formal explanation of terms, definitions, or
concepts are discussed or explained by the teacher. 
